and therefore make her gravestraight:
the crowner hath sat on her, andfinds it Christian burial.
How can that be,
unless she drowned herself inher own defense?
Why, 'tis found so.
It must be "se offendendo;" itcannot be else.
For here lies the point:
if I drown myself wittingly, itargues an act:
and an act hath three branches.
It is to act, to do, to perform.
Argal, she drowned herselfwittingly.
Nay, but hear you, goodmandelver.
Give me leave.
Here lies the water; good: herestands the man; good;
if the man go to this water anddrown himself,
it is, will he, nill he, hegoes,--mark you that;
but if the water come to him anddrown him,
he drowns not himself.
Argal, he that is not guilty ofhis own death
shortens not his own life.
But is this law?
Ay, marry, is't; crowner's questlaw.
Will you ha' the truth on't?
If this had not been agentlewoman,
she should have been buried outo' Christian burial.
Why, there thou say'st:
and the more pity that greatfolk
should have countenance in thisworld
to drown or hang themselves,more than their even Christian.
Come, my spade.
There is no ancient gentlemanbut gardeners,
ditchers, and grave-makers: theyhold up Adam's profession.
Was he a gentleman?
He was the first ever bore arms.
Why, he had none.
What, art a heathen?
How dost thou understand theScripture?
The Scripture says, "Adamdigged."
Could he dig without arms?
I'll put another question tothee:
if thou answerest me not to thepurpose,
confess thyself.
Go to.
What is he that builds stronger
than either the mason, theshipwright, or the carpenter?
The gallows-maker;
for that frame outlives athousand tenants.
I like thy wit well, in goodfaith:
the gallows does well; but howdoes it do well?
It does well to those that doill.
Now thou dost ill to say thegallows is built stronger
than the church: argal, thegallows may do well to thee.
To't again, come.
"Who builds stronger than amason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?"
Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
Marry, now I can tell.
To't.
Mass, I cannot tell.
Cudgel thy brains no more aboutit,
for your dull ass will not mendhis pace with beating;
and, when you are asked thisquestion next, say,
"a grave-maker: the houses thathe makes last"--
Until doomsday."
Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetchme a stoup of liquor.
In youth, when I did love, didlove,
Methought it were very sweet, Tocontract,
O, the time, for, ah, my behove,
methought there was nothingmeet.
Has this fellow no feeling ofhis business
that he sings at grave-making?
Custom hath made it in him aproperty of easiness.
'Tis e'en so:
the hand of little employmenthath the daintier sense.
But age, with his stealing step,
Hath claw'd me in his clutch,
And shipped me into the land,
As if I had never been such.
That skull had a tongue in itand could sing once.
How the knave jowls it to theground
as if it were Cain's jaw-bonethat did the first murder!
This might be the pate of apolitician,
which this ass now o'er-reaches;
one that would circumvent God,might it not?
It might, my lord.
Or of a courtier;
which could say, "Good morrow,sweet lord!
How dost thou, sweet lord?"
This might be my lordsuch-a-one,
that praised my lordsuch-a-one's horse,
when he meant to beg it; mightit not?
Ay, my lord.
Why, e'en so: and now my LadyWorm's;
chapless, and knocked about themazzard with a sexton's spade.
Here's fine revolution, an' wehad the trick to see't.
A spade, For and a shroudingsheet:
O, a pit of clay for to be madeFor such a guest is meet.
There's another: why may notthat be the skull of a lawyer?
Why does he suffer this rudeknave now
to knock him about the sconcewith a dirty shovel,
and will not tell him of hisaction of battery?
Hmm?
I will speak to this fellow.
Whose grave's this, sirrah?
Mine, sir.
O, a pit of clay for to be madeFor such a guest is meet.
Indeed I think it be thine; thouliest in't.
You lie out on't, sir, andtherefore it's not yours:
for my part, I do not lie in't,and yet it is mine.
Thou dost lie in't, to be in'tand say it is thine:
'tis for the dead, not for thequick;
therefore thou liest.
'Tis a quick lie, sir;
'twill away gain, from me toyou.
What man dost thou dig it for?
For no man, sir.
What woman, then?
None, neither.
Who is to be buried in't?
One that was a woman, sir; but,rest her soul, she's dead.
Absolute the knave is!
We must speak by the card orequivocation will undo us.
How long hast thou been agrave-maker?
Of all the days i' the year,
I came to't that day that ourlast king Hamlet
overcame Fortinbras.
How long is that since?
Cannot you tell that?
Every fool can tell that:
it was the very day that youngHamlet was born;
he that is mad and sent intoEngland.
Ay, marry, why was he sent intoEngland?
Why, because he was mad: heshall recover his wits there;
or, if he do not, it's no greatmatter there.
Why?
'Twill a not be seen in himthere;
there the men are as mad as he.
How came he mad?
Very strangely, they say.
How strangely?
Faith, e'en with losing hiswits.
Upon what ground?
Why, here in Denmark:
I have been sexton here, man andboy, thirty years.
How long will a man lie i' theearth ere he rot?
I' faith, if he be not rottenbefore he die--
as we have many pocky corsesnow-a-days,
will scarce hold the laying in.
He'll last you some eight yearor nine year.
A tanner will last you nineyear.
Why he more than another?
Why, sir, his hide is so tannedwith his trade
that it will keep out water agreat while;
and your water is a sore decayerof your whoreson dead body.
Here's a skull now;
lain in the earth three andtwenty years.
Whose was it?
A whoreson mad fellow's it was:
whose do you think it was?
Nay, I know not.
A pestilence on him for a madrogue!
Poured a flagon of Rhenish on myhead once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir,Yorick's skull,
the king's jester.
This?
E'en that.
Let me see.
Alas, poor Yorick!
I knew him, Horatio:
a fellow of infinite jest, ofmost excellent fancy:
he hath borne me on his back athousand times;
and now, how abhorred in myimagination it is!
My gorge rises at it.
Here hung those lips that I havekissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now?
Your gambols?
Your songs?
Your flashes of merriment,
that were wont to set the tableon a roar?
Not one now, to mock your owngrinning?
Quite chap-fallen?
Now get you to my lady'schamber,
and tell her, let her paint aninch thick,
to this favour she must come;make her laugh at that.
Prithee, Horatio, tell me onething.
What's that, my lord?
Dost thou think Alexander lookedo' this fashion i' the earth?
E'en so, my lord.
And smelt so?
Pah!
E'en so.
To what base uses we may return,Horatio!
Why may not imagination tracethe noble dust of Alexander,
till he find it stopping abung-hole?
'Twere to consider too curiouslyto consider so.
No, faith, not a jot as thus:
Alexander died, Alexander wasburied,
Alexander returneth into dust;
the dust is earth; of earth wemake loam;
and why of that loam, whereto hewas converted,
might they not stop abeer-barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead andturn'd to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep thewind away:
O, that that earth, which keptthe world in awe,
Should patch a wall to expel thewinter's flaw!
Soft!
Soft awhile!
Here comes the king, the queen,the courtiers.
Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites?
This doth betoken The corse theyfollow
did with desperate hand Fordo itown life:
'twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile, and mark.
What ceremony else?
That is Laertes, A very nobleyouth: mark.
Her obsequies have been as farenlarged As we have warrantise:
her death was doubtful;
And, but that great commando'ersways the order,
She should in groundunsanctified have lodged
Till the last trumpet:
for charitable prayers, Shards,flints and pebbles
should be thrown on her;
Yet here she is allow'd hervirgin crants,
Her maiden strewments
and the bringing home Of belland burial.
Must there no more be done?
No more be done:
We should profane the service ofthe dead To sing such requiem
and such rest to her As topeace-parted souls.
Lay her i' the earth.
And from her fair and unpollutedflesh
May violets spring!
I tell thee, churlish priest,
A ministering angel shall mysister be,
When thou liest howling.
What, the fair Ophelia!
Sweets to the sweet: farewell!
I hoped thou wouldst have beenmy Hamlet's wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to havedeck'd, sweet maid,
And not have strew'd thy grave.
O, treble woe Fall ten timestreble on that cursed head,
Whose wicked deed
thy most ingenious senseDeprived thee of!
Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once morein mine arms:
Now pile your dust upon thequick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain youhave made,
To o'ertop old Pelion,
or the skyish head Of blueOlympus.
What is he whose grief Bearssuch an emphasis?
Whose phrase of sorrow Conjuresthe wandering stars
and makes them stand Likewonder-wounded hearers?
This is I, Hamlet the Dane.
The devil take thy soul!
Thou pray'st not well.
I prithee, take thy fingers frommy throat;
Pluck them asunder.
Hamlet, Hamlet!
Be quiet!
I will fight with him upon thistheme
Until my eyelids will no longerwag.
O my son, what theme?
I loved Ophelia!
Forty thousand brothers Couldnot,
with all their quantity of love,Make up my sum.
What wilt thou do for her?
O, he's mad, Laertes.
For love of God, forbear him.
'Swounds, show me what thou'ltdo: Woo't weep?
Woo't fight?
Woo't fast?
Woo't tear thyself?
Woo't drink up eisel?
Eat a crocodile?
I'll do't.
Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping inher grave?
Be buried quick with her, and sowill I:
And, if thou prate of mountains,
let them throw Millions of acreson us,
till our ground, Singeing hispate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart!
Nay, an thou'lt mouth, I'll rantas well as thou.
This is mere madness:
And thus awhile the fit willwork on him;
Anon, as patient as the femaledove,
When that her golden coupletsare disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.
Hear you, sir;
What is the reason that you useme thus?
I loved you ever: but it is nomatter;
Let Hercules himself do what hemay,
The cat will mew and dog willhave his day.
I pray you, good Horatio, waiton him.
Strengthen your patience in ourlast night's speech;
We'll put the matter to thepresent push.
Good Gertrude, set some watchover your son.
This grave shall have a livingmonument:
An hour of quiet shortly shallwe see;
Till then, in patience ourproceedings be.
So much for this, sir: now shallyou see the other;
You do remember all thecircumstance?
Remember it, my lord?
Sir, in my heart there was akind of fighting
That would not let me sleep:
methought I lay Worse than themutines in the bilboes.
Rashly, And praised be rashnessfor it, let us know,
Our indiscretion sometimesserves us well
When our deep plots do pall: andthat should learn us
There's a divinity that shapesour ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.
That is most certain.
Up from my cabin, My sea-gownscarf'd about me,
in the dark Groped I to find outthem; had my desire.
Finger'd their packet,
and in fine withdrew To mine ownroom again;
making so bold, My fearsforgetting manners,
to unseal Their grandcommission;
where I found, Horatio,-- Oroyal knavery!--
an exact command,
Larded with many several sortsof reasons
Importing Denmark's health andEngland's too,
With, ho!
Such bugs and goblins in mylife,
That, on the supervise, noleisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding ofthe axe,
My head should be struck off.
Is't possible?
Here's the commission: read itat more leisure.
But wilt thou hear me how I didproceed?
I do beseech you.
Being thus be-netted round withvillanies,--
I sat me down, Devised a newcommission, wrote it fair:
I once did hold it, as ourstatists do,
A baseness to write fair andlabour'd much
How to forget that learning,
but, sir, now It did me yeoman'sservice:
wilt thou know The effect ofwhat I wrote?
Ay, good my lord.
An earnest conjuration from theking,
As England was his faithfultributary,
As love between them like thepalm might flourish,
As peace should still herwheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween theiramities,
And many such-like 'As'es ofgreat charge,
That, on the view and knowing ofthese contents,
Without debatement further, moreor less,
He should those bearers put tosudden death,
Not shriving-time allow'd.
How was this seal'd?
Why, even in that was heavenordinant.
I had my father's signet in mypurse,
Which was the model of thatDanish seal.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantzgo to't.
Why, man, they did make love tothis employment;
They are not near my conscience;
their defeat Does by their owninsinuation grow:
'Tis dangerous when the basernature
comes Between the pass and fellincensed points
Of mighty opposites.
Why, what a king is this!
Does it not, think thee, standme now upon--
He that hath kill'd my king,whored my mother,
Popp'd in between the electionand my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for myproper life,
And with such cozenage--
is't not perfect conscience, Toquit him with this arm?
and is't not to be damn'd,
To let this canker of our nature
come In further evil?
It must be shortly known to himfrom England
What is the issue of thebusiness there.
It will be short: the interim ismine;
And a man's life's no more thanto say, "One."
But I am very sorry, goodHoratio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself;
For, by the image of my cause, Isee The portraiture of his:
I'll court his favours.
But, sure, the bravery of hisgrief
did put me Into a toweringpassion.
Peace!
Who comes here?
Your lordship is right welcomeback to Denmark.
I humbly thank you, sir.
Dost know this water-fly?
No, good my lord.
Thy state is the more gracious;for 'tis a vice to know him.
He hath much land, and fertile.
'Tis a chough; but, as I say,
spacious in the possession ofdirt.
Sweet lord, if your lordshipwere at leisure,
I should impart a thing to youfrom his majesty.
I shall receive it, sir, withall diligence of spirit.
Put your bonnet to his rightuse;
'tis for the head.
I thank your lordship. It isvery hot.
No, believe me, it's very cold;the wind is northerly.
It is indifferent cold, my lord,indeed.
And yet methinks it is verysultry and hot
for my complexion.
Exceedingly, my lord; it is verysultry,--
as 'twere,-- I cannot tell how.
But, my lord, his majesty bademe signify to you
that he has laid a great wageron your head:
sir, this is the matter,--
I beseech you, sir, remember--
Nay, good my lord; for my ease,in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to courtLaertes;
believe me, an absolutegentleman,
full of most excellentdifferences,
of very soft society and greatshowing:
indeed, to speak feelingly ofhim,
he is the card or calendar ofgentry,
for you shall find in him thecontinent
of what part a gentleman wouldsee.
Sir, his definement suffers noperdition in you;
though, I know, to divide himinventorially
would dizzy the arithmetic ofmemory,
and yet but yaw neither, inrespect of his quick sail.
But, in the verity of extolment,
I take him to be a soul of greatarticle;
and his infusion of such dearthand rareness,
as, to make true diction of him,his semblable is his mirror;
and who else would trace him,his umbrage, nothing more.
O, Your lordship speaks mostinfallibly of him.
The concernancy, sir?
Why do we wrap the gentleman inour more rawer breath?
Sir?
Is't not possible to understandin another tongue?
You will do't, sir, really.
What imports the nomination ofthis gentleman?
Of Laertes?
His purse is empty already; allhis golden words are spent.
Of him, sir.
I know you are not ignorant.
I would you did;
and yet, in faith, if you did,it would not much approve me.
Well, sir?
You are not ignorant of whatexcellence Laertes is.
I dare not confess that,
lest I should compare with himin excellence;
but, to know a man well were toknow himself.
I mean, sir, for his weapon;
but in the imputation laid onhim by them,
in his meed he's unfellowed.
What's his weapon?
Rapier and dagger.
That's two of his weapons: but,well.
The king, sir, hath laid, sir,
that in a dozen passes betweenyourself and him,
he shall not exceed you threehits:
he hath laid on twelve for nine;
and it would come to immediatetrial,
if your lordship would vouchsafethe answer.
How if I answer "no"?
I mean, my lord, the oppositionof your person in trial.
Sir, I will walk here in thehall:
if it please his majesty,
'tis the breathing time of daywith me;
let the foils be brought, thegentleman willing,
and the king hold his purpose, Iwill win for him an' I can;
if not, I will gain nothing butmy shame and the odd hits.
Shall I re-deliver you e'en so?
To this effect.
After what flourish your naturewill.
I commend my duty to yourlordship.
Yours, yours.
He does well to commend ithimself;
there are no tongues else for'sturn.
This lapwing runs away with theshell on his head.
He did comply so with his dugbefore he sucked it.
You will lose this wager, mylord.
I do not think so: since he wentinto France,
I have been in continualpractice:
I shall win at the odds.
But thou wouldst not think howill all's here about my heart:
but it is no matter.
Nay, good my lord.
It is but foolery.
But yet it is such a kind ofgain-giving
as would perhaps trouble awoman.
If your mind dislike any thing,obey it:
I will forestall their repairhither
and say you are not fit.
Not a whit, we defy augury.
There's a special providence inthe fall of a sparrow.
If it be now, 'tis not to come;
if it be not to come, it will benow;
if it be not now, yet it willcome:
the readiness is all.
Let be.
Come, Hamlet, come, and takethis hand from me.
Give me your pardon, sir: I havedone you wrong;
But pardon't, as you are agentleman.
This presence knows, And youmust needs have heard,
how I am punish'd With a soredistraction.
What I have done,
That might your nature, honour,and exception Roughly awake,
I here proclaim was madness.
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes?
Never Hamlet: If Hamlet fromhimself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself doeswrong Laertes,
Hamlet does it not; Hamletdenies it.
Who does it, then?
His madness: if't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that iswrong'd;
His madness is poor Hamlet'senemy.
Sir, in this audience,
Let my disclaiming from apurposed evil
Free me so far in your mostgenerous thoughts,
That I have shot mine arrow o'erthe house,
And hurt my brother.
I am satisfied in nature, Whosemotive, in this case,
should stir me most To myrevenge:
but in my terms of honour Istand aloof;
and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder masters, ofknown honour,
I have a voice and precedent ofpeace,
To keep my name ungored.
But till that time, I do receiveyour offer'd love like love,
And will not wrong it.
I embrace it freely;
And will this brother's wagerfrankly play.
Give us the foils.
Come on.
Come, one for me.
I'll be your foil, Laertes:
in mine ignorance Your skillshall,
like a star i' the darkestnight,
Stick fiery off indeed.
You mock me, sir.
No, by this hand.
Give them the foils, youngOsric.
Hamlet, You know the wager?
Very well, my lord.
Your grace hath laid the odds o'the weaker side.
I do not fear it; I have seenyou both:
But since he is better'd, wehave therefore odds.
This is too heavy. Let me seeanother.
This likes me well.
These foils have all a length?
Ay, my good lord.
Set me the stoops of wine uponthat table.
If Hamlet make the first orsecond hit
Or quit in answer of the thirdexchanges,
Let all the battlements theirordnance fire:
The king shall drink to Hamlet'sbetter breath;
And in the cup an union shall hethrow,
Richer than that which foursuccessive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn.
Give me the cup;
And let the kettle to thetrumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneerwithout,
The cannons to the heavens, theheaven to earth,
"Now the king drinks to Hamlet."
Come, begin: And you, thejudges, bear a wary eye.
Come on, sir.
Come, my lord.
One.
No.
Judgment.
A hit, a very palpable hit.
Well; again.
Stay; give me drink.
Hamlet, this pearl is thine;Here's to thy health.
Give him the cup.
I'll play this bout first; setit by awhile.
Come.
Another hit. What say you?
A touch, a touch, I do confess.
Our son shall win.
He's fat, and scant of breath.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin,rub thy brows;
The queen carouses to thyfortune, Hamlet.
Good madam!
Gertrude, do not drink.
I will, my lord; I pray you,pardon me.
It is the poison'd cup: it istoo late.
I dare not drink yet, madam; byand by.
Come, let me wipe thy face.
My lord, I'll hit him now.
I do not think't.
And yet it is almost against myconscience.
Come, for the third, Laertes.
You but dally; I pray you, passwith your best violence;
I am afeard you make a wanton ofme.
Say you so?
Come on.
Nothing, neither way.
Have at you now!
Part them; they're incensed.
Nay, come, again.
Look to the queen there, ho!
They bleed on both sides.
How is it, my lord?
How is't, Laertes?
Why, as a woodcock to mine ownspringe, Osric;
I am justly kill'd with mine owntreachery.
How does the queen?
She swounds to see them bleed.
No, no, the drink, the drink,--Omy dear Hamlet,--
The drink, the drink!
I am poison'd.
O villany!
Ho!
Let the doors be lock'd:Treachery!
Seek it out.
It is here, Hamlet:
Hamlet, thou art slain;
No medicine in the world can dothee good;
In thee there is not half anhour's life;
The treacherous instrument is inthy hand,
Unbated and envenom'd.
The foul practice Hath turn'ditself on me.
Lo, here I lie, Never to riseagain:
thy mother's poison'd: I can nomore.
The king, the king's to blame.
The point!--envenom'd too!
Then, venom, to thy work.
Treason!
O, yet defend me, friends; I ambut hurt.
Here, thou incestuous,murderous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion.
Is thy union here?
Follow my mother.
He is justly served;
It is a poison temper'd by him--
Exchange forgiveness with me,noble Hamlet:
Mine and my father's death comenot on thee,
Nor thine on me.
Heaven make thee free of it!
I follow thee.
I am dead, Horatio.
Wretched queen, adieu!
You that look pale and trembleat this chance
That are but mutes or audienceto this act,
Had I but time-- as this fellsergeant, death,
Is strict in his arrest-- Icould tell you--
But let it be.
Horatio, I am dead; Thou livest;
report me and my cause aright Tothe unsatisfied.
Never believe it: I am more anantique Roman than a Dane:
Here's yet some liquor left.
As thou'rt a man, Give me thecup.
Let go; by heaven.
O God Horatio,
If thou didst ever hold me inthy heart
Absent thee from felicityawhile,
And in this harsh world draw thybreath in pain,
To tell my story.
What warlike noise is this?
Young Fortinbras, with conquestcome from Poland,
To the ambassadors of Englandgives This warlike volley.
O, I die, Horatio;
The potent poison quiteo'er-crows my spirit:
I cannot live to hear the newsfrom England;
But I do prophesy the electionlights On Fortinbras:
he has my dying voice;
So tell him, with theoccurrents,
more and less, Which havesolicited.
The rest is silence.
Now cracks a noble heart.
Good night, sweet prince.
And flights of angels sing theeto thy rest!
Why does the drum come hither?
Where is this sight?
What is it ye would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, ceaseyour search.
This quarry cries on havoc.
O proud death,
What feast is toward in thineeternal cell,
That thou so many princes at ashot
So bloodily hast struck?
The sight is dismal;
And our affairs from Englandcome too late:
The ears are senseless thatshould give us hearing,
To tell him his commandment isfulfill'd,
That Rosencrantz andGuildenstern are dead:
Where should we have our thanks?
Not from his mouth,
Had it the ability of life tothank you:
He never gave commandment fortheir deaths.
But since, so jump upon thisbloody question,
You from the Polack wars, andyou from England,
Are here arrived give ordersthat these bodies
High on a stage be placed to theview;
And let me speak to the yetunknowing world
How these things came about:
so shall you hear Of carnal,bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casualslaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning andforced cause,
And, in this upshot,
purposes mistook Fall'n on theinventors' heads:
all this can I Truly deliver.
Let us haste to hear it.
Call the noblest to theaudience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace myfortune:
I have some rights of memory inthis kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantagedoth invite me.
That I shall have also cause tospeak,
And from his mouth whose voicewill draw on more.
Let this same be presentlyperform'd,
Even while men's minds are wild;
lest more mischance On plots anderrors, happen.
Let four captains Bear Hamlet,like a soldier, to the stage;
For he was likely, had he beenput on,
To have proved most royal.
And for his passage,
The soldiers' music and therites of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies.
Such a sight as this Becomes thefield,
but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.